Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris are two
intellectual heavyweights who have
engaged in several heated and
thought-provoking debates over the years
covering topics such as religion
morality and politics
their debates have been watched by
millions of people around the world and
have sparked countless discussions among
their fans and critics alike
in today's video we're going to be
counting down the top five debate
moments between Jordan Peterson and Sam
Harris
let's get right into it number five
answered prayers
during a lively debate in Vancouver Sam
questioned Jordan's claim that God could
answer prayers leading to this Exchange
okay so here's here's an exercise you
can try
so here what you do is is as you sit on
the edge of your bed
and you say
okay what I did was wrong
and you have to really believe this
right so you've thought about it's
killing you
killing you it's now you're penitent
and you're confessing let's say and
you're confessing to yourself as much as
to anyone and you say
I really want to know what I did wrong
and I really want to know what I could
do to put it right and I'm willing to
accept any answer that will manifest
itself to me try that
see what happens well that's a prayer
that will be answered and it won't be
answered in the way that you want it to
be answered I can bloody well tell you
that okay but but that well what are you
communicating with that what are you
communicating with you no no that that
is something that that is a process that
I'm
familiar with it doesn't require any
Supernatural explanation and it's
certainly
it certainly doesn't require that we
imagine that any of our books were
dictated by the creator of the universe
I didn't say that it's acquired
I was asked to provide an instance of
prayer that worked and that's what I did
I didn't do anything other than that
that's fully understandable in terms of
human psychology and it's not
understandable because we don't know
where the answer comes from well we
don't know where anything comes from
that's true yeah okay so so yeah but
that doesn't that doesn't open the door
that we one thing we can know with
absolute certainty is that that whoever
wrote the Bible didn't know either and
there's many other things he or she
didn't know like everything else we know
scientifically right it's not it's not
so obvious what people know no one even
no one even knew the brain was involved
in any of this right so yeah but they
probably knew about as much as we do
about how the brain was involved in it
number four god-shaped thing Jordan's
claim that both he and Sam act as if God
exists sparked this funny yet deep
discussion about the nature of God what
in that so in what sense do you mean
what is the god that you act as though
he she it exists and what is the what
what is the god-shaped thing I must have
in my life to prevent me from being a
quote real atheist okay well I'm I'm I'm
going to read some things that I wrote
because it's so complicated that I'm not
sure that I can just spin it off the top
of my head and so you'll have to excuse
me okay so
here's here's some propositions and
they're complicated and they need to be
unpacked so I'm just going to read them
and you're that'll have to do for the
time being so God Is How We
imaginatively and collectively represent
the existence and action of
Consciousness across time as the most
real aspects of existence manifest
themselves across the longest of time
frames but are not necessarily
apprehensible as objects in the here and
now so what that means in some sense is
that you have conceptions of reality
built into your biological and
metaphysical structure that a
consequence of processes of evolution
that that occurred over unbelievably
vast expanses of time and that structure
your perception of reality in ways that
it wouldn't be structured if you only
lived for the amount of time that you're
going to live and that's also part of
the problem of deriving values from
Facts because you're evanescent and and
you can't derive the right values from
the facts that portray themselves to you
in your lifespan which is why you have a
biological structure that it's like 3.5
billion years old so God is that which
eternally dies and is reborn in the
pursuit of higher being and truth that's
a fundamental element of hero mythology
God is the highest value in the
hierarchy of values that's another way
of looking at it God is what calls and
what responds in the Eternal Call to
Adventure God is the voice of conscience
God is the source of judgment and mercy
and guilt God is the future to which we
make sacrifices and something akin to
the transcendental repository of
reputation here's a cool one if you're
an evolutionary biologist God
God God is that which selects among men
in the Eternal hierarchy of men so you
know men arrange themselves into
hierarchies and then men rise in the
hierarchy and there's principles that
are important that determine the
probability of their rise and those
principles aren't tyrannical power
they're something like the ability to
articulate truth and the ability to be
competent and the ability to make
appropriate moral judgments and if you
can do that in a given situation then
all the other men will vote you up the
hierarchy so to speak and that will
radically increase your reproductive
Fitness and the operation of that
process across long expanses of time
looks to me like it's codified in
something like the notion of God the
Father it's also the same thing that
makes women men attractive to women
because men women peel off the top of
the male hierarchy and the question is
what should be at the top of the
hierarchy and the answer right now is
tyranny as part of the patriarchy but
the real answer is something more like
the ability to use truthful speech in
the service of let's say well-being and
so that's that's something that operates
across tremendous expenses of time and
it plays a role in the selection for
survival itself which makes it a
fundamental reality to Jordan Nevada can
I just cut in here with one question uh
stop with that for now what
foreign
so I I was not hearing in that list of
attributes a God who
could care if anyone masturbated
I was not hearing a God who depends what
else is stopping you from doing Sam
well I'm sorry but I missed that wait I
said it depends on what else it's
stopping you from doing
well okay so it's it's yeah it's
important to do something other than
masturbate yes
yes which is which which actually
constitutes a problem which is harder
than the sounds
number three own it in this clip Sam
attempts to pin Jordan down on the
extent of his belief in the more
outrageous elements of the Bible the the
fact that it takes you 20 minutes
to admit that there that
a lot of the Bible is filled with
barbaric nonsense I don't think it took
me 20 minutes to admit Yeah well yeah
we'll go to the tape on this these
things matter these things matter
and I'm just saying it's like you only
if you're saying that there's a danger
if you're in a parish of one or in a
parish of one thousand or a parish of a
hundred thousand but not in the parish
that has anything in common with the
with the Bible Thumpers in my country
who think that Jesus is very likely
coming back in their lifetime because he
never died and he's going to judge the
living and the dead and there will be a
resurrection and Hell Fire and all the
rest if that's not the game you're
playing at all
own it
[Applause]
why why are you why are you why are you
all applauding about that it's like what
what do you mean own it it's like I
already made my claim it's like I'm not
playing a religious fundamentalist game
so what's all the Applause about so I
don't understand that
and own it it's like I was just listen I
was as clear as I possibly could be when
I delineated my answer to the question
people say well what do you mean by God
someone wants to ask you if Jesus one
second answer but no well forget it man
I think we can actually
I don't want to end on a note of
acrimony but someone once asked you
whether you thought Jesus was literally
resurrected and you said it would take
me 40 hours to answer that question
okay that's that's the kind of thing I'm
responding to here you don't need to do
that if you have a clear-cut answer to
that question I don't have a clear
Credence and if you don't and if you
don't that that connects with many other
things that we still have to talk about
yes definitely yeah I think because
because
that it isn't obvious in the biblical
account that Christ was literally
resurrected so it's not simple no no but
if the question is do you think let's
put it probabilistically I mean
anything's possible I'll tell you that
it's possible that he was physically
resurrected I mean it's it's not it's
even possible wait a second with respect
to quantum mechanics
the point is I said it would take me 40
hours to answer the question I didn't
say that he was we'll go that way how's
this for an answer almost certainly not
number two
ghosts after Jordan spent a good bit of
time sharing his ideas of what God is
Sam used an analogy to expose an
apparent flaw in Jordan's thinking I'm
wondering what percentage of religious
people who who would say oh yeah I
believe in God and it's the most
important thing in my life uh what
percentage of those religious people do
you think have in mind a god of the sort
you just described I don't know Sam it's
a good question because when I go talk
to people when I when I talk to people
online and use exactly this terminology
millions of people listen
so it's not so obvious which what
percentage of people see it this way
it's it may be that they have the
intuitions but they haven't been
articulated well I mean this is this is
the problem this is what worries me
about this so
yeah I mean you you you could do the
same thing with
the idea of ghosts right so so people
traditionally have believed in ghosts
it's a it's an archetype you might say
the ghost survival of death is certainly
an archetypes and we know what most
people most of the time mean when they
say they believe in ghosts and I say I
don't believe in ghosts and you say no
no you you do believe in ghosts ghosts
are your relationship to the Unseen
that's a ghost so you have a a new
definition of ghost that you're putting
in in the place provided which I have to
say well of course I have a relationship
to the Unseen so I I guess I do believe
in ghosts you know you win that argument
but that
simply isn't what most people mean by a
ghost mostly but you can't use that
simplified argument about my conception
of ghosts as an analogy for the
propositions that I just put forward
this is what I see you do I mean maybe
you have more to say on the topic of God
but this is what I hear you doing with
God you have defined
God that most people believe in and we
know this is the god that most people I
was asked what God I believed in no yes
no but I'm asking you what percentage
yes but you you by Shifting the the
definition you have robbed the the noun
the traditional noun of its traditional
meaning and you're giving you're
imparting to people
wait a second wait a second I'm not sure
what do you mean by traditional meaning
look it's one of the one of the
elemental claims in the Old Testament is
that you're not even supposed to utter
the name of God because by defining it
too tightly you lose its Essence and so
let's not be talking about what the
classical definition of God is here okay
it's a historical non-starter number one
Heaven and Hell
our top spot goes to this moment where
Jordan used ideas from Sam's book the
moral landscape to argue that if Sam
just took his thinking a bit further he
would arrive at a surprising conclusion
so I'm going to do a quick re-reading of
the moral landscape
so because see you talk about GE Moore's
argument of infinite regress
who claim that something's good and you
equate it with something you can also
ask infinitely why the thing you're
equating it with is good
now it seems to me that the way that you
step out of that argument
correct me if I'm wrong here is you tell
this you tell us you tell a story
I'm not trying to be smart about that
you tell two stories you tell a story
about someone who has an absolutely
terrible life they're in a in a jungle
where nature is trying to kill them all
the time and while they're trying to be
killed by Nature while nature is trying
to kill them all the time horrible
barbaric thugs are making their life
miserable in every possible way okay so
that's one
pull let's say and then another Pool you
identify and these are hypotheticals so
I guess they're fictions that's one way
of thinking about it even though they're
extracted from real situations they're
they're they're meta fictions they're
meta truths that's another way of
thinking about it you contrast a good
life and you know that's a life where
the person has enough to eat and enough
shelter and you know they have the
things that you would expect people to
want you say this is a bad life and you
say this is a good life and so and then
you say that's and and then you make a
side move which I would say is that
that's an objectively verifiable fact I
would say I don't think it is an
objectively verifiable fact I think it's
a fundamental moral claim and I think
that's where you put your stake in the
ground and I would say when I read that
I thought
well if you take your jungle story which
you've extracted from a bunch of Horrors
and and compiled
and you take your positive story which
you've extracted from the bunch of
Horrors or a bunch of of of of
quasi-utopias let's say and compiled
you're two-thirds of the way to a
landscape of Hell In Heaven
right also then why not continue the
abstraction and say look what we're
really trying to avoid here is hell oh
yeah we're really trying to move towards
this Heaven yeah but oh yeah but you
know as soon as we do that my religious
landscape no but my name for hell is
this is very interesting because like
the
we're talking we're talking about this
at dinner
we were talking about this at dinner and
how the the overlap or lack of overlap
between our audiences and so like I just
heard from your audience there and
you might have heard from the odd
convert but what's amazing to me is so
like
I have to do some work to figure out
what point they think you made
because look wait a second wait a second
wait a second
I said If You're Gonna produce a fiction
why not go right to the end okay because
you did produce a fiction it's
you you can tell stories by way of
communicating certain ideas I mean
that's obviously I'm not saying stories
aren't incredibly powerful and useful
and inevitable right it's like we we you
wait I think you are you know am I not
saying you might not be saying that
they're that they're they're not they're
not inevitable but you are debating
their utility and power because you know
you said that you don't need this story
as an intermediate so now we have a few
doors open here which I think we should
okay we should extract the most out of
these areas that we've touched and not
run on to something else so okay and
there you have it our top five debate
moments between Jordan Peterson and Sam
Harris
whether you're a fan of Peterson or
Harris or simply someone who enjoys
thought-provoking debates we hope you've
enjoyed this countdown
which of these moments did you find the
most compelling do you agree with our
ranking let us know in the comments
below
and if you enjoyed this video be sure to
hit that like button and subscribe to
our channel for more content like this
thanks for watching